README.md, before:

# BuildingMOTIF 
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/buildingmotif/badge/?version=latest)](https://buildingmotif.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest) 
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=HAFSYH45NX)](https://codecov.io/gh/NREL/BuildingMOTIF) 

The Building Metadata OnTology Interoperability Framework (BuildingMOTIF) is a tool for working with the following semantic data models.

- [ASHRAE 223P](https://www.ashrae.org/about/news/2018/ashrae-s-bacnet-committee-project-haystack-and-brick-schema-collaborating-to-provide-unified-data-semantic-modeling-solution)
- [Brick](https://brickschema.org/)
- [Project Haystack](https://project-haystack.org/)

# Installing
Install [Python >= 3.8.0](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
```
pip install buildingmotif
```

# Using
See the `notebooks` directory. 

# Developing
1. Install [Python >= 3.8.0](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
2. Install [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation).
3. Clone, download, or fork this repository.
4. Install dependenices with poetry.
    ```
    poetry install
    poetry run pre-commit install
    ```
5. To initialize your database, create your local configs file, enter your db uri, and run the migrations.
    ```
    cp configs.py.dist configs.py

    echo "DB_URI = 'sqlite:////path/to/db.db'" > configs.py

    poetry run alembic upgrade head
    ```
## Uping the API
``` 
poetry run python buildingmotif/api/app.py
```
API will run on localhost:5000

## Testing
``` 
poetry run pytest
```
To run tests with DEBUG prints add the `-o log_cli=true` argument to the command

## Formatting
```
poetry run black .
poetry run isort .
poetry run pylama
```

## Migrating
After making changes to the tables, you must make a new db migration.
```
poetry run alembic revision -m "Description of Changes." --autogenerate
```
Additional changes may need to be made to the migration, so be sure to check it. [Read here](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#auto-generating-migrations) for more information on alembic autogenerate migrations.

## Documenting
Documentation can be built locally with the following command, which will make the HTML files in the `docs/build/html/` directory.

```
cd docs
poetry run make html
```

## Building and Publishing
```
# build and publish test
poetry publish --build --dry-run

# build and publish
poetry publish --build
```

## Web App

1. [Download Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
2. [Install Angular](https://angular.io/guide/setup-local)
3. See [buildingmotif-app/README.md](buildingmotif-app/README.md)

# Visualizing
![repo-vis](./diagram.svg)

Commit message:

Add Development Disclaimer to README

README.md, after:

# BuildingMOTIF 
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/buildingmotif/badge/?version=latest)](https://buildingmotif.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest) 
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=HAFSYH45NX)](https://codecov.io/gh/NREL/BuildingMOTIF) 

**BuildingMOTIF is in rapid early development and is NOT recommended for production applications at this point. Curious users are encouraged to use BuildingMOTIF and report bugs, workflow improvement suggestions, and features requests to this repository.**

The Building Metadata OnTology Interoperability Framework (BuildingMOTIF) is a tool for working with the following semantic data models.

- [ASHRAE 223P](https://www.ashrae.org/about/news/2018/ashrae-s-bacnet-committee-project-haystack-and-brick-schema-collaborating-to-provide-unified-data-semantic-modeling-solution)
- [Brick](https://brickschema.org/)
- [Project Haystack](https://project-haystack.org/)

# Installing
Install [Python >= 3.8.0](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
```
pip install buildingmotif
```

# Using
See the `notebooks` directory. 

# Developing
1. Install [Python >= 3.8.0](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
2. Install [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation).
3. Clone, download, or fork this repository.
4. Install dependenices with poetry.
    ```
    poetry install
    poetry run pre-commit install
    ```
5. To initialize your database, create your local configs file, enter your db uri, and run the migrations.
    ```
    cp configs.py.dist configs.py

    echo "DB_URI = 'sqlite:////path/to/db.db'" > configs.py

    poetry run alembic upgrade head
    ```
## Uping the API
``` 
poetry run python buildingmotif/api/app.py
```
API will run on localhost:5000

## Testing
``` 
poetry run pytest
```
To run tests with DEBUG prints add the `-o log_cli=true` argument to the command

## Formatting
```
poetry run black .
poetry run isort .
poetry run pylama
```

## Migrating
After making changes to the tables, you must make a new db migration.
```
poetry run alembic revision -m "Description of Changes." --autogenerate
```
Additional changes may need to be made to the migration, so be sure to check it. [Read here](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#auto-generating-migrations) for more information on alembic autogenerate migrations.

## Documenting
Documentation can be built locally with the following command, which will make the HTML files in the `docs/build/html/` directory.

```
cd docs
poetry run make html
```

## Building and Publishing
```
# build and publish test
poetry publish --build --dry-run

# build and publish
poetry publish --build
```

## Web App

1. [Download Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
2. [Install Angular](https://angular.io/guide/setup-local)
3. See [buildingmotif-app/README.md](buildingmotif-app/README.md)

# Visualizing
![repo-vis](./diagram.svg)
