docs/tutorials/model_correction.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  cell_metadata_filter: -all
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Model Correction

```{margin}
```{important}
This tutorial assumes that `BuildingMOTIF` has already been installed in the local environment.
```

The purpose of this tutorial is to learn how to fix a model that fails validation using BuildingMOTIF Templates to automate the correction process.

## Setup

Like the previous tutorial, we'll create an in-memory BuildingMOTIF instance, load the model, and load some libraries. We'll also load the manifest from the previous tutorial.

```{margin}
```{warning}
Currently, libraries in `../../buildingmotif/libraries/` are *included* and libraries in `../../libraries/` are *excluded* from the [BuildingMOTIF Python package](https://pypi.org/project/buildingmotif/) (available by cloning, downloading, or forking the repository). See https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/issues/133. 
```

```{code-cell}
from rdflib import Namespace
from buildingmotif import BuildingMOTIF
from buildingmotif.dataclasses import Model, Library
from buildingmotif.namespaces import BRICK # import this to make writing URIs easier

# in-memory instance
bm = BuildingMOTIF("sqlite://")

# create the namespace for the building
BLDG = Namespace('urn:bldg/')

# create the building model
model = Model.create(BLDG, description="This is a test model for a simple building")

# load tutorial 2 model and manifest
model.graph.parse("tutorial2_model.ttl", format="ttl")
manifest = Library.load(ontology_graph="tutorial2_manifest.ttl")

# load libraries included with the python package
constraints = Library.load(ontology_graph="../../buildingmotif/libraries/constraints/constraints.ttl")

# load libraries excluded from the python package (available from the repository)
brick = Library.load(ontology_graph="../../libraries/brick/Brick-subset.ttl")
g36 = Library.load(directory="../../libraries/ashrae/guideline36")
```

## Model Validation

Let's validate the model again to see what's causing the failure. 

```{code-cell}
# gather shape collections into a list for ease of use
shape_collections = [
    brick.get_shape_collection(),
    constraints.get_shape_collection(),
    manifest.get_shape_collection(),
    g36.get_shape_collection(),
]

# pass a list of shape collections to .validate()
validation_result = model.validate(shape_collections)
print(f"Model is valid? {validation_result.valid}")

# print reasons
for diff in validation_result.diffset:
    print(f" - {diff.reason()}")
```

## Model Correction with Templates

The model is failing because the AHU doesn't have the minimum number of supply fans associated with it. We *could* add the fan explicitly by adding those triples to the model like we've done previously, but we can also ask BuildingMOTIF to generate new templates that explicitly prompt us for the missing information. We can also take a closer look at the first autogenerated template

```{code-cell}
# create a new library to hold these generated templates
generated_templates = Library.create("my-autogenerated-templates")
for diff in validation_result.diffset:
    diff.resolve(generated_templates)

# print some of the autogenerated template
for templ in generated_templates.get_templates():
    templ = templ.inline_dependencies()
    print(f"Name (autogenerated): {templ.name}")
    print(f"Parameters (autogenerated): {templ.parameters}")
    print("Template body (autogenerated):")
    print(templ.body.serialize())
    print('-' * 79)
    break # just to demonstrate the first piece of output
```

In this case, the generated templates are fairly simple. They require an input for the name of the supply fan and the names of several missing points. We can loop through each of these generated templates and create the names. Here, we are creating arbitrary names for the points but in a real setting you would likely pull the equipment or point names from an external source like a Building Information Model or BACnet network[^1] (see future tutorials for how to do this!) Another challenge is the fact that we already have a supply fan in the model. Here, we can take advantage of the fact that the name of the fan in the existing model are just the name of the AHU wtih the `-Fan` postfix. The name of the AHU is in the generated templates (see above) so we can just pull out the name of the AHU, add the postfix, and use that as the value for the `name` parameter.

[^1]: https://bacnet.org/

```{code-cell}
from buildingmotif.namespaces import BRICK
for templ in generated_templates.get_templates():
    templ = templ.inline_dependencies()
    # get name of AHU from template body
    ahu_name = next(templ.body.subjects(predicate=BRICK.hasPart))
    # generate the name of the supply fan
    supply_fan_name = ahu_name + '-Fan'

    # we know from the exploration above that each template has
    # 1 parameter called 'name', which we assign to the name of the supply fan
    bindings = {
        "name": supply_fan_name,
    }
    # the rest of the parameters have random names, so let's generate
    # random URIs for those by putting the name of the parameter at the end
    # of the fan's name
    for p in templ.parameters - {'name'}:
        print(p)
        bindings[p] = supply_fan_name + p
    supply_fan = templ.evaluate(bindings)
    model.add_graph(supply_fan)
    print(f"Added supply fan {supply_fan_name}")
```

We use the same code as before to ask BuildingMOTIF if the model is now valid:

```{code-cell}
validation_result = model.validate(shape_collections)
print(f"Model is valid? {validation_result.valid}")
```

Success! The model is valid with respect to the targeted use case, i.e. the model can support the high-performance sequences of operation for single zone VAV AHUs from ASHRAE Guideline 36. Let's take a look at the validated model and save it for use in future tutorials.

```{code-cell}
# print model
print(model.graph.serialize())

#save model
model.graph.serialize(destination="tutorial3_model.ttl")
```

Commit message:

Updating docs (#279)
* fix developer docs for building docs

* fixing model correction doc page

* add comment for filling in params

* Update docs/tutorials/model_correction.md

Co-authored-by: Tobias Shapinsky <tobiasshapinsky@gmail.com>

* removing tutorial-specific comments

* clarify comment

* fixup usage of validation API

---------

Co-authored-by: Tobias Shapinsky <tobiasshapinsky@gmail.com>

docs/tutorials/model_correction.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  cell_metadata_filter: -all
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Model Correction

```{margin}
```{important}
This tutorial assumes that `BuildingMOTIF` has already been installed in the local environment.
```

The purpose of this tutorial is to learn how to fix a model that fails validation using BuildingMOTIF Templates to automate the correction process.

## Setup

Like the previous tutorial, we'll create an in-memory BuildingMOTIF instance, load the model, and load some libraries. We'll also load the manifest from the previous tutorial.

```{margin}
```{warning}
Currently, libraries in `../../buildingmotif/libraries/` are *included* and libraries in `../../libraries/` are *excluded* from the [BuildingMOTIF Python package](https://pypi.org/project/buildingmotif/) (available by cloning, downloading, or forking the repository). See https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/issues/133. 
```

```{code-cell}
from rdflib import Namespace
from buildingmotif import BuildingMOTIF
from buildingmotif.dataclasses import Model, Library
from buildingmotif.namespaces import BRICK # import this to make writing URIs easier

# in-memory instance
bm = BuildingMOTIF("sqlite://")

# create the namespace for the building
BLDG = Namespace('urn:bldg/')

# create the building model
model = Model.create(BLDG, description="This is a test model for a simple building")

# load tutorial 2 model and manifest
model.graph.parse("tutorial2_model.ttl", format="ttl")
manifest = Library.load(ontology_graph="tutorial2_manifest.ttl")

# load libraries included with the python package
constraints = Library.load(ontology_graph="constraints/constraints.ttl")

# load libraries excluded from the python package (available from the repository)
brick = Library.load(ontology_graph="../../libraries/brick/Brick-subset.ttl")
g36 = Library.load(directory="../../libraries/ashrae/guideline36")
```

## Model Validation

Let's validate the model again to see what's causing the failure. 

```{code-cell}
# gather shape collections into a list for ease of use
shape_collections = [
    brick.get_shape_collection(),
    constraints.get_shape_collection(),
    manifest.get_shape_collection(),
    g36.get_shape_collection(),
]

# pass a list of shape collections to .validate()
validation_result = model.validate(shape_collections)
print(f"Model is valid? {validation_result.valid}")

# print reasons
for uri, diffset in validation_result.diffset.items():
    for diff in diffset:
        print(f" - {diff.reason()}")
```

## Model Correction with Templates

The model is failing because the AHU doesn't have the minimum number of supply fans associated with it. We *could* add the fan explicitly by adding those triples to the model like we've done previously, but we can also ask BuildingMOTIF to generate new templates that explicitly prompt us for the missing information. We can also take a closer look at the first autogenerated template

```{code-cell}
# create a new library to hold these generated templates
generated_templates = Library.create("my-autogenerated-templates")
for uri, diffset in validation_result.diffset.items():
    for diff in diffset:
        diff.resolve(generated_templates)

# print some of the autogenerated template
for templ in generated_templates.get_templates():
    templ = templ.inline_dependencies()
    print(f"Name (autogenerated): {templ.name}")
    print(f"Parameters (autogenerated): {templ.parameters}")
    print("Template body (autogenerated):")
    print(templ.body.serialize())
    print('-' * 79)
```

In this case, the generated templates are fairly simple. They require an input for the name of the supply fan and the names of several missing points. We can loop through each of these generated templates and create the names. Here, we are creating arbitrary names for the points but in a real setting you would likely pull the equipment or point names from an external source like a Building Information Model or BACnet network[^1] (see future tutorials for how to do this!) Another challenge is the fact that we already have a supply fan in the model. Here, we can take advantage of the fact that the name of the fan in the existing model are just the name of the AHU wtih the `-Fan` postfix. The name of the AHU is in the generated templates (see above) so we can just pull out the name of the AHU, add the postfix, and use that as the value for the `name` parameter.

If we just add the generated templates to the building model, we will probably pass validation *but* the entity names will have no significance to the building. It is highly recommended to use the template evaluation features (demonstrated below) to fill in the parameters with the "real" names of the entities as they appear in the building and/or building management system.

[^1]: https://bacnet.org/

```{code-cell}
from buildingmotif.namespaces import BRICK
for templ in generated_templates.get_templates():
    templ = templ.inline_dependencies()

    # get name of AHU from template body; this is the subject of the "brick:hasPart P:name" triple
    bindings = templ.body.query("SELECT ?ahu WHERE { ?ahu brick:hasPart <urn:___param___#name> }").bindings
    if not len(bindings):
        # skip this template if there is no 'ahu' variable in it
        continue
    # bindings[0]['ahu'] returns the value of the 'ahu' variable for the first row of the results
    ahu_name = bindings[0]['ahu']

    # Generate the name of the supply fan. If we were modeling a real building,
    # we would want to use the name of the actual supply fan. Here, we just choose
    # a sensible name for the purposes of the tutorial.
    supply_fan_name = ahu_name + '-Fan'

    # we know from the exploration above that each template has
    # 1 parameter called 'name', which we assign to the name of the supply fan
    bindings = {
        "name": supply_fan_name,
    }
    # the rest of the parameters have random names, so let's generate
    # random URIs for those by putting the name of the parameter at the end
    # of the fan's name
    for p in templ.parameters - {'name'}:
        print(p)
        bindings[p] = supply_fan_name + p
    supply_fan = templ.evaluate(bindings)
    model.add_graph(supply_fan)
    print(f"Added supply fan {supply_fan_name}")
```

We use the same code as before to ask BuildingMOTIF if the model is now valid:

```{code-cell}
validation_result = model.validate(shape_collections)
print(f"Model is valid? {validation_result.valid}")
```

Success! The model is valid with respect to the targeted use case, i.e. the model can support the high-performance sequences of operation for single zone VAV AHUs from ASHRAE Guideline 36. Let's take a look at the validated model and save it for use in future tutorials.

```{code-cell}
# print model
print(model.graph.serialize())

#save model
model.graph.serialize(destination="tutorial3_model.ttl")
```
