docs/reference/developer_documentation.md, before:

# Developer Documentation 

## Installing

1. Install prerequisites:
   - [Python >= 3.8.0](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
   - [Poetry 1.4.0](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation)
2. Clone this repository.
3. Change directory to the new `/BuildingMOTIF` directory.
4. Create and activate a virtual environment:
   ```
   # for example
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```
5. Install dependencies and pre-commit.
    ```
    poetry install
    poetry run pre-commit install
    ```

## Developing

To initialize your database, create your local configs file, enter your db uri, and run the migrations.
```
cp configs.py.dist configs.py

echo "DB_URI = 'sqlite:////path/to/db.db'" > configs.py

poetry run alembic upgrade head
```

After making changes to the tables, you must make a new db migration.
```
poetry run alembic revision -m "Description of Changes." --autogenerate
```

Additional changes may need to be made to the migration, so be sure to check it. [Read here](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#auto-generating-migrations) for more information on alembic autogenerate migrations.

Uping the API
``` 
poetry run python buildingmotif/api/app.py
```
API will run on localhost:5000

## Continuous Integration

The CI process for developers' local clones and the remote repository should be the same for reproduceability, i.e. the commands in the following files should be the same (with *slight* differences).

- [.pre-commit-config.yaml](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/blob/develop/.pre-commit-config.yaml)
- [ci.yml](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/tree/develop/.github/workflows/ci.yml)

### Local

Local CI is done automatically when pushing with `.pre-commit-config.yaml`, which runs *static* tests that can be run manually with the following command. 
```
pre-commit run -a
```

Pre-commit commands can be run individually with the following commands. Configuration of `isort`, `black`, and `mypy` are done in [pyproject.toml](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/blob/develop/pyproject.toml) and configuration of `flake8` is done in [.flake8](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/blob/develop/.flake8). 
```
poetry run isort --check
poetry run black --check
poetry run flake8 buildingmotif
poetry run mypy
```

The above does not include *dynamic* testing (unit and integration), which can be run manually with the following command. To run tests with DEBUG prints add the `-o log_cli=true` argument to the command
```
poetry run pytest
```

### Remote

Remote CI is done with a GitHub Action from the `ci.yml` workflow.

## Documenting
Documentation can be built locally with the following command, which will make the HTML files in the `docs/build/html/` directory.

```
cd docs
poetry run make html
```

## Building and Publishing
```
# build and publish test
poetry publish --build --dry-run

# build and publish
poetry publish --build
```

## Web App

1. [Download Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
2. [Install Angular](https://angular.io/guide/setup-local)
3. See [buildingmotif-app/README.md](buildingmotif-app/README.md)

Commit message:

Remove --check flags from pre-commit config (#261)
* remove --check flags from pre-commit config

* update developer documentation

* clarify pre-commit documentation

docs/reference/developer_documentation.md, after:

# Developer Documentation 

## Installing

1. Install prerequisites:
   - [Python >= 3.8.0](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
   - [Poetry 1.4.0](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation)
2. Clone this repository.
3. Change directory to the new `/BuildingMOTIF` directory.
4. Create and activate a virtual environment:
   ```
   # for example
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```
5. Install dependencies and pre-commit.
    ```
    poetry install
    poetry run pre-commit install
    ```

## Developing

To initialize your database, create your local configs file, enter your db uri, and run the migrations.
```
cp configs.py.dist configs.py

echo "DB_URI = 'sqlite:////path/to/db.db'" > configs.py

poetry run alembic upgrade head
```

After making changes to the tables, you must make a new db migration.
```
poetry run alembic revision -m "Description of Changes." --autogenerate
```

Additional changes may need to be made to the migration, so be sure to check it. [Read here](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#auto-generating-migrations) for more information on alembic autogenerate migrations.

Uping the API
``` 
poetry run python buildingmotif/api/app.py
```
API will run on localhost:5000

## Continuous Integration

The CI process for developers' local clones and the remote repository should be the same for reproduceability, i.e. the commands in the following files should be the same (with *slight* differences).

- [.pre-commit-config.yaml](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/blob/develop/.pre-commit-config.yaml)
- [ci.yml](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/tree/develop/.github/workflows/ci.yml)

### Local

Local CI is done automatically when comitting with `.pre-commit-config.yaml`, which runs *static* tests against staged files and generates fixes as possible. If the pre-commit checks fail the generated fixes can be inspected and staged as desired before attempting to commit again.


The command below will test files and generate fixes to formatting errors in files (running without `-a` will only fix staged files) without generating a commit upon successful completion.
```
pre-commit run -a
```

Pre-commit commands can be run individually with the following commands. Configuration of `isort`, `black`, and `mypy` are done in [pyproject.toml](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/blob/develop/pyproject.toml) and configuration of `flake8` is done in [.flake8](https://github.com/NREL/BuildingMOTIF/blob/develop/.flake8). 
```
poetry run isort
poetry run black
poetry run flake8 buildingmotif
poetry run mypy --install-types --non-interactive --ignore-missing-imports
```

The above does not include *dynamic* testing (unit and integration), which can be run manually with the following command. To run tests with DEBUG prints add the `-o log_cli=true` argument to the command
```
poetry run pytest
```

### Remote

Remote CI is done with a GitHub Action from the `ci.yml` workflow.

## Documenting
Documentation can be built locally with the following command, which will make the HTML files in the `docs/build/html/` directory.

```
cd docs
poetry run make html
```

## Building and Publishing
```
# build and publish test
poetry publish --build --dry-run

# build and publish
poetry publish --build
```

## Web App

1. [Download Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
2. [Install Angular](https://angular.io/guide/setup-local)
3. See [buildingmotif-app/README.md](buildingmotif-app/README.md)
